# Managing Packages with npm

List of Sections:

<!-- TOC -->

- [Introduction to the Managing Packages with npm Challenges](#introduction-to-the-managing-packages-with-npm-challenges)
- [How to Use package.json, the Core of Any Node.js Project or npm Package](#how-to-use-packagejson-the-core-of-any-nodejs-project-or-npm-package)
- [Add a Description to Your package.json](#add-a-description-to-your-packagejson)
- [Add Keywords to Your package.json](#add-keywords-to-your-packagejson)
- [Add a License to Your package.json](#add-a-license-to-your-packagejson)
- [Add a Version to Your package.json](#add-a-version-to-your-packagejson)
- [Expand Your Project with External Packages from npm](#expand-your-project-with-external-packages-from-npm)
- [Manage npm Dependencies By Understanding Semantic Versioning](#manage-npm-dependencies-by-understanding-semantic-versioning)
- [Use the Tilde-Character to Always Use the Latest Patch Version of a Dependency](#use-the-tilde-character-to-always-use-the-latest-patch-version-of-a-dependency)
- [Use the Caret-Character to Use the Latest Minor Version of a Dependency](#use-the-caret-character-to-use-the-latest-minor-version-of-a-dependency)
- [Remove a Package from Your Dependencies](#remove-a-package-from-your-dependencies)

<!-- /TOC -->

---

## Introduction to the Managing Packages with npm Challenges

I learned much of what I know about npm by creating two different boilerplates: my [Static Site Boilerplate](https://github.com/Squibs/static-site-boilerplate) and my [React-Redux Boilerplate](https://github.com/Squibs/react-redux-boilerplate).

I created the *static site boilerplate* while learning webpack, which I took upon myself after finishing my first paid freelance project. I wanted to make something that I could potentially use for future static websites, but have yet to find another use for this boilerplate. I am very happy I went through with making this boilerplate though, because I learned quite a lot about not only webpack but npm as well.

The *React-Redux boilerplate* I created has been through many changes as I progress further through the *front end libraries* projects, as I am changing it as I progress and learn more about webpack. Stephen Grider's **Modern React with Redux** course on *Udemy* helped initially get me going on learning both React and Redux which also gave me the idea to make my own boilerplate rather than relying on the popular create-react-app. Both of my boilerplates use npm in order to manage all the assets each boilerplate needs to function.

**You can view this project and project files: [On Glitch!](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/fcc-squibs-npm?path=package.json)**

**I have created a backup of the project files: [Here](https://github.com/Squibs/freeCodeCamp/tree/master/5.%20APIs%20and%20Microservices/fcc-squibs-npm)**

---

## How to Use package.json, the Core of Any Node.js Project or npm Package

Looking through these lessons, there does not look like there will be much to take notes on, but I'll see what I can come up with.

```JSON
{
  "author": "Zachary Holman"
}
```

This section just has you changing the `author` field on the `package.json` file.

Node Package Manager (npm) is a command-line tool used by developers to share and control modules (or packages) of JavaScript code written for use with Node.js.

npm creates a `package.json` file that lists the package dependencies for your project as well as the specific version for each dependency. All packages are put into a folder named `nodemodules`.

---

## Add a Description to Your package.json

```JSON
{
  "author": "Zachary Holman",
  "description": "A project for freeCodeCamp to test my ability to manage npm packages."
}
```

If you ever wanted to publish a package to npm, it is important to remember that the `description` field should sell your idea to the user when they decide whether to install your package or not.

---

## Add Keywords to Your package.json

```JSON
{
  "author": "Zachary Holman",
  "description": "A project for freeCodeCamp to test my ability to manage npm packages.",
  "keywords": [ "freecodecamp", "package management" ]
}
```

The `keywords` field is where you can describe your project using related keywords. As an example, Bootstrap, a front-end framework to help design websites/apps, uses these keywords: `css, sass, mobile-first, responsive, front-end, framework, web`.

---

## Add a License to Your package.json

```JSON
{
  "author": "Zachary Holman",
  "description": "A project for freeCodeCamp to test my ability to manage npm packages.",
  "keywords": [ "freecodecamp", "package management" ],
  "license": "MIT"
}
```

The `license` field is where you inform users of your project, exactly what they are allowed to do with it.

Two common licenses for open source projects include: `MIT` and `BSD`. freeCodeCamp lists http://choosealicense.com as a great place to learn more about what license could fit your project.

Most countries have copyright laws that give you ownership of what you create by default, but it is good practice to explicitly state what users can and can't do.

---

## Add a Version to Your package.json

```JSON
{
  "author": "Zachary Holman",
  "description": "A project for freeCodeCamp to test my ability to manage npm packages.",
  "keywords": [ "freecodecamp", "package management" ],
  "license": "MIT",
  "version": "1.0.0"
}
```

The `version` field is what describes the current version of your project. This is useful for users that would like to stay on a specific version.

---

## Expand Your Project with External Packages from npm

```JSON
{
  "author": "Zachary Holman",
  "description": "A project for freeCodeCamp to test my ability to manage npm packages.",
  "keywords": [ "freecodecamp", "package management" ],
  "license": "MIT",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.14.0",
    "moment": "2.14.0"
  }
}
```

The `dependencies` field is used to list what other packages your project uses or is dependent on as well as the specific version for each package.

This is the biggest reason to use a package manager. Having a dependency manager beats having to manually going through and making sure every package is at the correct version. npm can automate setting up all the project dependencies, which makes creating new instances of your project, such as switching computers, very simple to do and ensures everything your project needs is there.

---

## Manage npm Dependencies By Understanding Semantic Versioning

```JSON
{
  "author": "Zachary Holman",
  "description": "A project for freeCodeCamp to test my ability to manage npm packages.",
  "keywords": [ "freecodecamp", "package management" ],
  "license": "MIT",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.14.0",
    "moment": "2.10.2"
  }
}
```

Typically the first number, of a dependency version number, represents a major change, such as an entire rework, or changes that might break existing features or backward compatibility. The second number represents minor changes that introduce new features that don't normally cause any issues with any existing feature. Finally, the third number is generally for small fixes, such as bug fixes or other minor changes.

---

## Use the Tilde-Character to Always Use the Latest Patch Version of a Dependency

```JSON
{
  "author": "Zachary Holman",
  "description": "A project for freeCodeCamp to test my ability to manage npm packages.",
  "keywords": [ "freecodecamp", "package management" ],
  "license": "MIT",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.14.0",
    "moment": "~2.10.2"
  }
}
```

There can be symbols in the version number of a dependency. A tilde ( `~` ) means that your project is okay with any small fixes (e.g. 1.2.x).

---

## Use the Caret-Character to Use the Latest Minor Version of a Dependency

```JSON
{
  "author": "Zachary Holman",
  "description": "A project for freeCodeCamp to test my ability to manage npm packages.",
  "keywords": [ "freecodecamp", "package management" ],
  "license": "MIT",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.14.0",
    "moment": "^2.10.2"
  }
}
```

A caret ( `^` ) means that your project is okay with upgrading to the most recent minor version of a dependency (e.g. 1.x.x).

---

## Remove a Package from Your Dependencies

```JSON
{
  "author": "Zachary Holman",
  "description": "A project for freeCodeCamp to test my ability to manage npm packages.",
  "keywords": [ "freecodecamp", "package management" ],
  "license": "MIT",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "^4.14.0"
  }
}
```

A package can be removed from the dependencies by simply removing the `"key": value` pair from the dependencies list.
