# MongoDB and Mongoose

List of Sections:

<!-- TOC -->

- [Install and Set Up Mongoose](#install-and-set-up-mongoose)
- [Create a Model - CRUD Part I - CREATE](#create-a-model---crud-part-i---create)
- [Create and Save a Record of a Model](#create-and-save-a-record-of-a-model)
- [Create Many Records with model.create()](#create-many-records-with-modelcreate)
- [Use model.find() to Search Your Database](#use-modelfind-to-search-your-database)
- [Use model.findOne() to Return a Single Matching Document from Your Database](#use-modelfindone-to-return-a-single-matching-document-from-your-database)
- [Use model.findById() to Search Your Database by _id](#use-modelfindbyid-to-search-your-database-by-_id)
- [Perform Classic Updates by Running Find, Edit, then Save](#perform-classic-updates-by-running-find-edit-then-save)
- [Perform New Updates on a Document Using model.findOneAndUpdate()](#perform-new-updates-on-a-document-using-modelfindoneandupdate)
- [Delete One Document Using model.findByIdAndRemove](#delete-one-document-using-modelfindbyidandremove)
- [Delete Many Documents with model.remove()](#delete-many-documents-with-modelremove)
- [Chain Search Query Helpers to Narrow Search Results](#chain-search-query-helpers-to-narrow-search-results)

<!-- /TOC -->

---

## Install and Set Up Mongoose

freeCodeCamp has us setup a MongoDB Atlas account and guides us through setting up a free database cluster for these lessons/challenges.

It appears freeCodeCamp has also decided to move away from using [Glitch](https://glitch.com/), and instead now favors [Replit](https://replit.com/), so that is what I will be using for this particular set of lessons compared to the previous ones in this section.

**You can view this project and project files: [On Replit!](https://replit.com/@Sulph/fcc-squibs-mongo#myApp.js)**<br>
(show hidden files from the 3 dots if empty)

**I have created a backup of the project files: [Here](./fcc-squibs-mongo/)**

**You can also view a live preview of this project: [Here](https://fcc-squibs-mongo--sulph.repl.co/)**

---

We can connect to our database with the following syntax:

```JavaScript
mongoose.connect(<Your URI>, { useNewUrlParser: true, useUnifiedTopology: true });
```

The Atlas MongoDB URI structure is similar to the following:

```
mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@<cluster-name>.prx1c.mongodb.net/<db-name>?retryWrites=true&w=majority
```

We store this uri in our `.env` file and access it through `process.env.ENVVAR`.

---

## Create a Model - CRUD Part I - CREATE

Replit is a real sever, and in real servers, the interactions with the database happen in handler functions. These functions are executed when some event happens (like when someone hits an endpoint on your API).

The `done()` function is a callback that tells us that we can proceed after completing an asynchronous operation such as inserting, searching, updating, or deleting.

This function follows the Node convention and should be called as `done(null, data)` on success or `done(err)` on error.

**Errors can occur when working with remote services**

```JavaScript
/* Example */

const someFunc = function(done) {
  //... do something (risky) ...
  if (error) return done(error);
  done(null, result);
};
```

Let's create a scheme called `personSchema` that follows this prototype:

```
- Person Prototype -
--------------------
name : string [required]
age :  number
favoriteFoods : array of strings (*)
```

The following are all the valid SchemaTypes in Mongoose ([From freeCodeCamp Article](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/introduction-to-mongoose-for-mongodb-d2a7aa593c57#2-defining-the-schema)):

- String
- Number
- Date
- Buffer
- Boolean
- Mixed (A generic / flexible data type)
- ObjectId
- Array
- Decimal128
- Map
- Schema

Mongoose plugins can also add custom SchemaTypes like int32.

SchemaTypes all have a set of options ([From mongoose docs](https://mongoosejs.com/docs/schematypes.html#schematype-options)):

- `required`: boolean or function, if true adds a required validator for this property
- `default`: Any or function, sets a default value for the path. If the value is a function, the return value of the function is used as the default.
- `select`: boolean, specifies default projections for queries
- `validate`: function, adds a validator function for this property
- `get`: function, defines a custom getter for this property using `Object.defineProperty()`.
- `set`: function, defines a custom setter for this property using `Object.defineProperty()`.
- `alias`: string, mongoose >= 4.10.0 only. Defines a virtual with the given name that gets/sets this path.
- `immutable`: boolean, defines path as immutable. Mongoose prevents you from changing immutable paths unless the parent document has `isNew: true`.
- `transform`: function, Mongoose calls this function when you call `Document#toJSON()` function, including when you `JSON.stringify()` a document.

We create a schema for the person called `personSchema`. Then Create a model of that schema called `Person` to complete this section.

```JavaScript
const mongoose = require('mongoose');

mongoose.connect(process.env.MONGO_URI, { useNewUrlParser: true, useUnifiedTopology: true });

const personSchema = new mongoose.Schema({
  name: {
    type: String,
    required: true,
  },
  age: Number,
  favoriteFoods: [String],
});

let Person = mongoose.model('Person', personSchema);
```

---

## Create and Save a Record of a Model

We will create and save a record of a model.

They've given us a `createAndSavePerson` function pre-defined.

```JavaScript
const createAndSavePerson = (done) => {
  done(null /*, data*/);
};
```

We need to create a document instance using the `Person` model constructor we made in the last challenge. We pass the `Person` constructor an object with the field we defined for the schema: `name`, `age`, and `favoriteFoods`.

Then we save this instance of the `Person` model using the `save` method, which has a callback function that has `err` and `data` which we pass to the `done` method.

~~Not entirely sure at this point if we pass the `err` or keep the null value freeCodeCamp defined already.~~

This was mentioned in the last section actually.

> It's following the Node convention, and should be called as `done(null, data)` on success, or `done(err)` on error.

```JavaScript
const createAndSavePerson = (done) => {
  const personInstance = new Person({
    name: 'Zack',
    age: 29,
    favoriteFoods: [ 'lobster', 'nachos' ]
  });
  
  personInstance.save((err, data) => err ? done(err) : done(null, data));
};
```

---

## Create Many Records with model.create()

We can create multiple instance of our model `Person` by using the `<model>.create()` method. This method takes an array of objects like `[{name: 'John', ...}, {...}, ...]` as the first argument and saves them all in the database.

We then call the `done` method as a callback as the second argument.

For this challenge we are given an `arrayOfPeople` argument in the method we create these people.

```JavaScript
const createManyPeople = (arrayOfPeople, done) => {
  manyPeople = Person.create(arrayOfPeople, (err, data) => err ? done(err) : done(null, data));
};
```

---

## Use model.find() to Search Your Database

The `<model>.find()` method can be used to search your database. It accepts a query document (a JSON object) as the first argument, then a callback.

This will return an array of matches. It supports an extremely wide range of search options.

```JavaScript
const findPeopleByName = (personName, done) => {
  Person.find({ name: personName }, (err, data) => err ? done(err) : done(null, data));
};
```

---

## Use model.findOne() to Return a Single Matching Document from Your Database

The `<model>.findOne()` method is very similar to the `<model>.find()` method, but this method only returns one document (not an array). This is especially useful when searching by properties that you have declared as unique.

```JavaScript
const findOneByFood = (food, done) => {
  Person.findOne({ favoriteFoods: food }, (err, data) => err ? done(err) : done(null, data));
};
```

---

## Use model.findById() to Search Your Database by _id

When saving a document, MongoDB automatically adds the field `_id`, and set it to a unique alphanumeric key. Searching by `_id` is an extremely frequent operation, so Mongoose provides a dedicated method for it.


```JavaScript
const findPersonById = (personId, done) => {
  Person.findById(personId, (err, data) => err ? done(err) : done(null, data));
};
```

---

## Perform Classic Updates by Running Find, Edit, then Save

Mongoose has a dedicated updating method `<model>.update()`. It is bound to the low-level mongo driver. It can bulk-edit many documents matching certain criteria, but it doesn't send back the updated document, only only a 'status' message. Furthermore, it makes model validations difficult, because it just directly calls the mongo driver.

```JavaScript
const findEditThenSave = (personId, done) => {
  const foodToAdd = "hamburger";

  Person.findById(personId, (err, data) => {
    if (err) return done(err);
    data.favoriteFoods.push(foodToAdd);
    data.save((err, newData) => err ? done(err) : done(null, newData));
  })
};
```

---

## Perform New Updates on a Document Using model.findOneAndUpdate()

Recent versions of Mongoose have methods to simplify documents updating. Some more advanced features (i.e. pre/post hooks, validation) behave differently with this approach, so the classic method is still useful in many situations. `findByIdAndUpdate()` can be used when searching by id.

```JavaScript
const findAndUpdate = (personName, done) => {
  const ageToSet = 20;

  Person.findOneAndUpdate(
    { name: personName },
    { age: ageToSet },
    {
      new: true,
      useFindAndModify: false,
    },
    (err, data) => err ? done(err) : done(null, data)
  );
};
```

Looks like there is a deprecation warning for this method.

```Console
Your app is listening on port 3000
POST
(node:394) DeprecationWarning: Mongoose `findOneAndUpdate()` and `findOneAndDelete()` without the `useFindAndModify` option set to false are deprecated.
See: https://mongoosejs.com/docs/5.x/docs/deprecations.html#findandmodify
(Use `node --trace-deprecation ...` to show where the warning was created)
```

So I've added the appropriate option in the above solution.

There appears to be a few more ways to set this option. At Global level:

```JavaScript
mongoose.set('useFindAndModify', false);
```

At connection level:

```JavaScript
mongoose.connect(uri, { useFindAndModify: false });
```

---

## Delete One Document Using model.findByIdAndRemove

`findByIdAndRemove` and `findOneAndRemove` are like the previous update methods. They pass the removed document to the database.

```JavaScript
const removeById = (personId, done) => {
  Person.findByIdAndRemove(personId, (err, data) => err ? done(err) : done(null, data));
};
```

---

## Delete Many Documents with model.remove()

`<model>.remove()` is useful to delete all the documents matching given criteria.

This method doesn't return the deleted document, but a JSON object containing the outcome of the operation, and the number of items affected.

```JavaScript
const removeManyPeople = (done) => {
  const nameToRemove = "Mary";

  Person.remove({ name: nameToRemove }, (err, data) => err ? done(err) : done(null, data));
};
```

---

## Chain Search Query Helpers to Narrow Search Results

If you don't pass the callback as the last argument to `<model>.find()` or any of the other search methods, the query will not be executed. You can store the query in a variable for later use. This kind of object enables you to build up a query using chaining syntax. The actual db search is executed when you finally chain the method `.exec()`. This last method always needs a callback.

```JavaScript
const queryChain = (done) => {
  const foodToSearch = "burrito";

  Person.find({ favoriteFoods: foodToSearch })
  .sort("name")
  .limit(2)
  .select('name favoriteFoods')
  .exec((err, data) => err ? done(err) : done(null, data));

  // other selection variations
  // .select(['name', 'favoriteFoods'])
  // .select({ name: 1, favoriteFoods: 1 })
  // not sure what the `1` would mean here
  // seems to do the same selection like the others
};
```
