# Advanced Node and Express

List of Sections:

<!-- TOC -->

- [Set up a Template Engine](#set-up-a-template-engine)
- [Use a Template Engine's Powers](#use-a-template-engines-powers)
- [Set up Passport](#set-up-passport)
- [Serialization of a User Object](#serialization-of-a-user-object)
- [Implement the Serialization of a Passport User](#implement-the-serialization-of-a-passport-user)
- [Authentication Strategies](#authentication-strategies)
- [How to Use Passport Strategies](#how-to-use-passport-strategies)
- [Create New Middleware](#create-new-middleware)
- [How to Put a Profile Together](#how-to-put-a-profile-together)
- [Logging a User Out](#logging-a-user-out)
- [Registration of New Users](#registration-of-new-users)
- [Hashing Your Passwords](#hashing-your-passwords)
- [Clean Up Your Project with Modules](#clean-up-your-project-with-modules)
- [Implementation of Social Authentication](#implementation-of-social-authentication)
- [Implementation of Social Authentication II](#implementation-of-social-authentication-ii)
- [Implementation of Social Authentication III](#implementation-of-social-authentication-iii)
- [Set up the Environment](#set-up-the-environment)
- [Communicate by Emitting](#communicate-by-emitting)
- [Handle a Disconnect](#handle-a-disconnect)
- [Authentication with Socket.IO](#authentication-with-socketio)
- [Announce New Users](#announce-new-users)
- [Send and Display Chat Messages](#send-and-display-chat-messages)

<!-- /TOC -->

---

## Set up a Template Engine

Template engines enable you to use static template files in your app. At runtime, the engine will replace variables in a template file with actual values which can be supplied by your server. It then transforms the template into a static HTML file that is sent to the client. This makes it easier to design an HTML page and allow for displaying variables on the page without needing to make an API call from the client.

Here we are going to be using `Pug`, express needs to know which template engine you are using. We can use the `set` method to assign `pug` as the `view engine` property's value.

```JavaScript
app.set('view engine', 'pug');
```

We can then `set` the `views` property of our `app` (Express), to point to the `./views/pug` directory. This will tell Express to render all views relative to that directory.

```JavaScript
app.set('views', './views/pug');
```

Then we can use the `res.render` method in a route to render a page. `'index'` here is in reference to the name of the `pug` filename.

```JavaScript
app.get('/', (req, res) => res.render('index'));
```

---

## Use a Template Engine's Powers

One of the best features about using a template engine is the ability to pass variables from the server to the template file before rendering it to HTML.

In `pug` you can use a variable by referencing the variable as `#{variable_name}` inline with other text on an element or by using an equal sign on the element without a space such as `p=variable_name`, which will assign the variable's value to the `p` element's text.

`Pug` is all about using whitespace and tabs to show nested elements and cutting down on the amount of code needed.

```pug
head
  script(type='text/javascript').
    if (foo) bar(1 + 5);
body
  if youAreUsingPug
      p You are amazing
    else
      p Get on it!
```

Which converts to:

```html
<head>
  <script type="text/javascript">
    if (foo) bar(1 + 5);
  </script>
</head>
<body>
  <p>You are amazing</p>
</body>
```

Let's pass the `#title` and `#message` variables to `pug`.

```JavaScript
app.get('/', (req, res) => res.render('index', { title: 'Hello', message: 'Please log in' }));
```

---

## Set up Passport

It is time to set up `Passport` so you can allow a user to register or log in to an account. We will also use Express-session to handle sessions. `Express-session` has a lot of advanced features you can use, but for now we'll use the basics.

Using this middleware saves the session id as a cookie in the client, and allows us to access the session data using that id on the server. This will keep personal account information out of the cookie used by the client to tell the server the clients are authenticated and keep the key to access the data stored on the server.

```JavaScript
const session = require('express-session');
const passport = require('passport');

app.use(session({
  secret: process.env.SESSION_SECRET,
  resave: true,
  saveUninitialized: true,
  cookie: { secure: false },
}));

app.use(passport.initialize());
app.use(passport.session());
```

---

## Serialization of a User Object

Serialization and deserialization are important concepts when it comes to authentication. When you serialize an object you are converting its contents into a small `key` which can then be deserialized into the original object.

We can have a serialize and a deserialize function in passport to do this.

```JavaScript
passport.serializeUser(cb);
passport.deserializeUser(cb);
```

The callback function that is passed to `serializeUser` takes two arguments: the full user object and a callback used by passport. This callback expects two arguments: an error, if one exists, and a unique key to identify the user that should be returned in the callback. With `MongoDB` you'll use the user's `_id` as this is guaranteed to be unique.

`deserializeUser` is called with two arguments: the unique key and callback function. This callback will take an error, if one exists, and the full user object.

In order to get a full user object, we can make a query search for a Mongo `_id`:

```JavaScript
passport.serializeUser((user, done) => {
  done(null, user._id);
});

// turns string `id` into an ObjectID(id).
passport.deserializeUser((id, done) => {
  myDataBase.findOne({ _id: new ObjectID(id) }, (err, doc) => {
    done(null, null);
  });
});
```

---

## Implement the Serialization of a Passport User

Make sure you connect to the database before starting ot listen for requests, as you will get errors otherwise. We can do this by encompassing our `serialization` and `app routes`:

```JavaScript
myDB(async client => {
  const myDataBase = await client.db('database').collection('users');

  // Be sure to change the title
  app.route('/').get((req, res) => {
    // Change the response to render the Pug template
    res.render('index', {
      title: 'Connected to Database',
      message: 'Please login'
    });
  });

  // Serialization and deserialization here...
  passport.serializeUser((user, done) => done(null, user._id));
  passport.deserializeUser((id, done) => {
    myDataBase.findOne({ _id: new ObjectID(id) }, (err, doc) => done(null, doc));
  });

  // Be sure to add this...
}).catch(e => {
  app.route('/').get((req, res) => {
    res.render('index', { title: e, message: 'Unable to connect to database' });
  });
});
// app.listen out here...
```

---

## Authentication Strategies

A strategy is a way of authenticating a user. A strategy can be used to allow users to authenticate based on locally saved information (if you have them register first) or from a variety of providers such as Google or GitHub.

We will use `Passport` middleware. Passport provides a number of set strategies that support authentication using a username and password, GitHub, Google, and more.

```JavaScript
const LocalStrategy = require('passport-local');
```

We tell passport to `use` an instantiated `LocalStrategy` object with a few settings defined. This all goes in the encapsulated database connection, as it relies on it.

```JavaScript
passport.use(new LocalStrategy((username, password, done) => {
  myDataBase.findOne({ username: username }, (err, user) => {
    console.log(`User ${username} attempted to log in.`);
    if (err) return done(err);
    if (!user) return done(null, false);
    if (password !== user.password) return done(null, false);
    return done(null, user);
  });
}));
```

This will try to find a user in your database with the entered username. It will then check for the password to match. Finally if there are no errors, the `user` object is returned and they are authenticated.

Strategies are set up using different settings. It is generally easy to set up based on the README in that strategy's repository.

An example would be the GitHub strategy. You don't need to worry about a username or password, because the user will be sent to GitHub's authenticate page to authenticate. As long as they are logged in and agree then GitHub returns their profile for you to use.

---

## How to Use Passport Strategies

Enable the `showLogin` value for the `'index'` page. This will then render a login page. This form is set up to `POST` to the path `/login`.

To authenticate on this route we need to add a middleware before sending a response. The middleware to use is `passport.authenticate('local')`. This middleware can also take some options such as `{ failureRedirect: '/' }`, which will redirect back to the homepage on failure. If we get through the middleware we will redirect to the `/profile` path, which needs a `GET` which will render the `/profile` html from the `profile.pug` file.

If authentication is successful the user object will be stored in the `req.user`, which we have not used here yet.


```JavaScript
app.get('/', (req, res) => {
  res.render('index', {
    title: 'Connected to Database',
    message: 'Please log in',
    showLogin: true,
  });
});

app.route('/login').post(passport.authenticate('local', { failureRedirect: '/' }), (req, res) => {
  res.redirect('/profile');
});

// fCC doesn't like this format apparently, test wouldn't pass
// app.post('/login', passport.authenticate('local', { failureRedirect: '/' }), (req, res) => {
//   res.redirect('/profile');
// });

app.get('/profile', (req, res) => res.render('profile'));
```

---

## Create New Middleware

At the moment any user can go to the `/profile` route whether they have been authenticated or not just by typing in the URL. We can prevent this by checking if the user is authenticated first before rendering the profile page. This is a perfect example of when to use a middleware.

This is an example of a `ensureAuthenticated` middleware.

```JavaScript
function ensureAuthenticated(req, res, next) {
  if (req.isAuthenticated()) {
    return next();
  }
  res.redirect('/');
};
```

Here we are checking if a user is authenticated by calling `Passport`'s `isAuthenticated` method on the `request` which will check if `req.user` is defined. If it is, then `next()` should be called. Otherwise you can respond to the request with a redirect back to your homepage to login.

We can then pass it on to our `/profile` route as middleware.

```JavaScript
const ensureAuthenticated = (req, res, next) => {
  if (req.isAuthenticated()) return next();
  res.redirect('/');
};

...

app.get('/profile', ensureAuthenticated, (req, res) => res.render('profile'));
```

---

## How to Put a Profile Together

Now that users are authenticated we can use that `req.user` with the stored user object to render the user's information.

We add an `h2` element that says welcome `username`, and add a logout button for the route `/logout`.

```pug
...
  body
    h1.border.center FCC Advanced Node and Express Profile
    h2.center#welcome Welcome, #{username}!
    a(href='/logout') Logout
```

Then in the `/profile` `GET`, we can pass an object like we did for the `/` route, and pass along the `pug` variables with their values:

```JavaScript
app.get('/profile', ensureAuthenticated, (req, res) => {
  return res.render('profile', { username: req.user.username });
});
```

---

## Logging a User Out

`Passport` provides the `req.logout()` method to easily unauthenticate a user. You can then redirect after that.

```JavaScript
app.get('/logout', (req, res) => {
  req.logout();
  res.redirect('/');
});
```

Handling 404 pages is commonly handled through the following middleware. Placed after all other routes.

```JavaScript
app.use((req, res, next) => {
  res.status(404).type('text').send('Not Found');
});
```

---

## Registration of New Users

We first need to enable the `showRegistration` variable for `pug`, to render the HTML for the registration form.

```JavaScript
app.get('/', (req, res) => {
  res.render('index', {
    title: 'Connected to Database',
    message: 'Please log in',
    showLogin: true,
    showRegistration: true,
  });
});
```

This form is setup to `POST` on `/register`.

```JavaScript
app.route('/register').post((req, res, next) => {
  myDataBase.findOne({ username: req.body.username }, (err, foundUser) => {
    if (err) next(err);
    if (foundUser) return res.redirect('/');
    myDataBase.insertOne({
      username: req.body.username,
      password: req.body.password,
    }, (err, doc) => {
      if (err) return res.redirect('/');
      // the inserted document is held within the ops property of the doc
      next(null, doc.ops[0]);
    });
  });
}, passport.authenticate('local', { failureRedirect: '/' }), (req, res) => {
  return res.redirect('/profile');
});
```

First we search the database with the `findOne` method. If there is a found user we redirect back to the index. Otherwise we `insertOne` into the database of the typed in `username` and `password`. This inserted document is then held within the `ops` property of the `doc`. We push these to the `next` to then authenticate the new user like we did previously for the `/login` route. Then finally redirect to the `/profile`.

---

## Hashing Your Passwords

At the moment we are storing `plaintext` passwords. This is **NEVER** okay. it is time to implement `BCrypt` to solve this issue.

We need to handle `hading` in two key areas: where we handle registering/saving a new account, and when you check to see that password is correct on login.

We are currently using `password: req.body.password` to store the user's `plaintext` password. We can hash the password instead by adding the following before our database logic: `const hash = bcrypt.hashSync(req.body.password, 12);` and then replace the `req.body.password`, so that we are now storing `password: hash` in the database.

We can then do the same for our `if (password !== user.password) return done(null, false);`. Instead we use the `bcrypt.compareSync` method.

```JavaScript
const bcrypt = require('bcrypt');

...

  app.route('/register').post((req, res, next) => {
    myDataBase.findOne({ username: req.body.username }, (err, foundUser) => {
      if (err) next(err);
      if (foundUser) return res.redirect('/');
      
      const hash = bcrypt.hashSync(req.body.password, 12);
      
      myDataBase.insertOne({
        username: req.body.username,
        // password: req.body.password,
        password: hash,
      }, (err, doc) => {
        if (err) return res.redirect('/');
        // the inserted document is held within the ops property of the doc
        next(null, doc.ops[0]);
      });
    });
  }, passport.authenticate('local', { failureRedirect: '/' }), (req, res) => {
    return res.redirect('/profile');
  });

...

  passport.use(new LocalStrategy((username, password, done) => {
    myDataBase.findOne({ username: username }, (err, user) => {
      console.log(`User ${username} attempted to log in.`);
      if (err) return done(err);
      if (!user) return done(null, false);
      // if (password !== user.password) return done(null, false);
      if (!bcrypt.compareSync(password, user.password)) return done(null, false);
      return done(null, user);
    });
  }));
```

---

## Clean Up Your Project with Modules

Not much to say about this, I've been splitting my code up into modules quite a lot when working with react.

Routes (`get`, `post`) are now in `routes.js` and the `passport.use`/`passport.serializeUser`/`passport.deserializeUser` are now in `auth.js`.

The async database call now looks like this:

```JavaScript
myDB(async client => {
  const myDataBase = await client.db('fcc-advanced-express').collection('users');

  routes(app, myDataBase);
  auth(app, myDataBase);
}).catch(e => {
  app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    res.render('index', { title: e, message: 'Unable to connect to database' });
  });
});
```

---

## Implementation of Social Authentication

A lot of this is just setting up your app on GitHub and getting a *Client ID* and a *Client Secret*. [Github OAuth](https://github.com/settings/developers).

After getting my *ID* and *Secret*, I stored them in my `.env`, or in this case the side panel for `replit`. These can be accessed through `process.env.VARIABLE_NAME` like any other `.env` variable.

We then enabled the next section of our `/` index page through a `pug` variable: `showSocialAuth: true`, this enables a "login with GitHub" button.

Two routes need to be handled `/auth/github` and `/auth/github/callback`. We set the callback when setting up our GitHub app, by setting the callback to `https://fcc-squibs-advanced-express.sulph.repl.co/auth/github/callback`.

Both of these routes are `GET` requests.

```JavaScript
app.get('/auth/github', passport.authenticate('github'));

app.route('/auth/github/callback')
  .get(passport.authenticate('github', { failureRedirect: '/'}), (req, res) => {
    return res.redirect('/profile');
  });
```

The `/auth/github/callback` looks exactly like our `/login` route. Except it's a GET request. The `/auth/github` route calls `passport` to authenticate `github`.

---

## Implementation of Social Authentication II

We now need to create the actual `strategy` for GitHub. `passport-github` will help us in this.

We need to tell `Passport` to use an instantiated `GitHubStrategy` which takes two arguments: an object containing `clientID` / `clientSecret` / `callbackURL` and a function to be called when a user is successfully authenticated. This function will determine if a user is new and what fields to save initially in the user's database object.

This is common across many strategies, but some may require more information. For example Google requires a `scope` as well which determines what kind of information your request is asking to be returned and asks the user to approve such access.

The current strategy we are implementing authenticates users using a GitHub account and OAuth 2.0 tokens. This strategy besides the `clientId` and `clientSecret` also requires a `verify` callback, which receives the access token and optional refresh token, as well as `profile` which contains the authenticated user's GitHub profile. The `verify` callback must call `cb` providing a user to complete authentication.


```JavaScript
const GitHubStrategy = require('passport-github').Strategy;

passport.use(new GitHubStrategy({
  clientID: process.env.GITHUB_CLIENT_ID,
  clientSecret: process.env.GITHUB_CLIENT_SECRET,
  callbackURL: /*INSERT CALLBACK URL ENTERED INTO GITHUB HERE*/
},
  function(accessToken, refreshToken, profile, cb) {
    console.log(profile);
    //Database logic here with callback containing your user object
  }
));
```

---

## Implementation of Social Authentication III

We now need to handle the profile returned from GitHub.

```JavaScript
...
  function(accessToken, refreshToken, profile, cb) {
    console.log(profile);
    //Database logic here with callback containing your user object
    myDataBase.findOneAndUpdate(
      { id: profile.id },
      {
        $setOnInsert: {
          id: profile.id,
          username: profile.username,
          name: profile.displayName || 'John Doe',
          photo: profile.photos[0].value || '',
          email: Array.isArray(profile.emails)
            ? profile.emails[0].value
            : 'No public email',
          created_on: new Date(),
          provider: profile.provider || ''
        },
        $set: {
          last_login: new Date()
        },
        $inc: {
          login_count: 1
        }
      },
      { upsert: true, new: true },
      (err, doc) => {
        console.log('hello');
        console.log(doc.value);
        console.log('hello');
        return cb(null, doc.value);
      }
    );
  }
...
```

This is calling a `findOneAndUpdate` search on the database for a matching `id`. If there is no matching id the additional parameters for this search: `{ upsert: true, new: tru }` makes it so that this login will be inserted instead.

The `$setOnInsert` update operation works when `upsert: true` is set. If the update operation does not result in an insert, the `$setOnInsert` does nothing. This will basically only run once, when the user is put into the database, otherwise it will not be ran again for a user.

`$set`, everything here will always be set, this is used here to update the `last_login` which is when the user last logged in.

`$inc` this operator increments a field by the set number, in this case `1`. So the login_count increments on each login.

Finally we have a callback function that calls / returns the `cb` callback function with `doc.value`

---

## Set up the Environment

We are going to be adding a chat feature. This will require `socket.io` To do so handle the route `/chat` with a `GET`. And make use of `ensureAuthenticated` like when a user tries to visit the `/profile` route. Pass a `pug` variable `{ user: req.user }`. Which is the user's entire object that is stored in the database.

We are going to redirect to the `/chat` route when someone logs in from github. set `req.session.user_id = req.user.id`. I'm not sure what `session.user_id` is referring to at this point, I'm assuming it will be used with `socket.io` in the next session. And change the redirect to `/chat` from `/profile`.

```JavaScript
...
  app.route('/chat')
    .get(ensureAuthenticated, (req, res) => {
      return res.render('chat', { user: req.user });
  });
...
  app.route('/auth/github/callback')
    .get(passport.authenticate('github', { failureRedirect: '/'}), (req, res) => {
      req.session.user_id = req.user.id;
      return res.redirect('/chat');
    });
...
```

We can instantiate `socket.io` in our server with `http`, which comes built-in with nodejs. Then change the current listening port to use `http`.

```JavaScript
const app = express();
const http = require('http').createServer(app);
const io = require('socket.io')(http);
...
const PORT = process.env.PORT || 3000;
http.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Listening on port ${PORT}`);
});
```

Then inside of our database async connection we can listen for a new connection from the client. This can be done with the `on` keyword. It requires two arguments: a string containing the title of the event that's emitted, and a function with which the data is passed through. For this case it's our connection listener, we will use `socket` to define the data in the second argument. A `socket` is an individual client who is connected.

```JavaScript
myDB(async client => {
  const myDataBase = await client.db('fcc-advanced-express').collection('users');

  routes(app, myDataBase);
  auth(app, myDataBase);

  // io listen
  io.on('connection', (socket) => {
    console.log('A user has connected');
  });
}).catch(e => {
  app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    res.render('index', { title: e, message: 'Unable to connect to database' });
  });
});
```

Finally on our `client.js` we need to have them connect as well, the following will load by the page after they've authenticated.

```JavaScript
$(document).ready(function () {
  /*global io*/
  let socket = io();
...
```

Note:`io()` works only when connecting to a socket hosted on the same url/server. For connecting to an external socket hosted elsewhere, you would use `io.connect('URL');`.

---

## Communicate by Emitting

`Emit` is the most common way of communicating you will use. When you `emit` something from the ser to `io` you send an event's name and data to all the connected sockets.

Inside of our server io `on` connection listener, we can keep track of the number of users. Every time there is a connection increase the number of currentUsers. Then we use `emit` the user count and pass the `currentUsers`.

Then for the client to get the number of users we use the `socket` `on` listener for the user count, and we can access this data.

```JavaScript
let currentUsers = 0;
io.on('connection', (socket) => {
  ++currentUsers;
  io.emit('user count', currentUsers);
  console.log('A user has connected');
});
```

```JavaScript
$(document).ready(function () {
  /*global io*/
  let socket = io();

  socket.on('user count', function(data) {
    console.log(data);
  });
...
```

---

## Handle a Disconnect

We were only incrementing the user counter, and it was not going back down on disconnects. To decrease the amount of users we have to listen on each `socket` instead of the server. This code goes on the server however. We re-emit the amount of users.


```JavaScript
  let currentUsers = 0;
  io.on('connection', (socket) => {
    ++currentUsers;
    io.emit('user count', currentUsers);
    console.log('A user has connected');

    socket.on('disconnect', () => {
      console.log('A user has disconnected');
      --currentUsers;
      io.emit('user count', currentUsers);
    });
  });
```

---

## Authentication with Socket.IO

We cannot currently determine who is connected to the web socket. `req.user` contains the user object, but that' sonly when the user interacts with the web server. Web sockets also have no `req` and therefore no user data. One way to solve this problem is by parsing and decoding the cookie that contains the passport session then deserializing it to obtain the user object.

`passport.socketio`, `connect-mongo` and `cookie-parser` are packages we will use to solve this.

```JavaScript
const passportSocketIo = require('passport.socketio');
const cookieParser = require('cookie-parser');
const MongoStore = require('connect-mongo')(session);
const URI = process.env.MONGO_URI;
const store = new MongoStore({ url: URI });

function onAuthorizeSuccess(data, accept) {
  console.log('successful connection to socket.io');

  accept(null, true);
}

function onAuthorizeFail(data, message, error, accept) {
  if (error) throw new Error(message);
  console.log('failed connection to socket.io:', message);
  accept(null, false);
}

io.use(
  passportSocketIo.authorize({
    cookieParser: cookieParser,
    key: 'express.sid',
    secret: process.env.SESSION_SECRET,
    store: store,
    success: onAuthorizeSuccess,
    fail: onAuthorizeFail
  })
);
```

Configuring `passport` authentication for `socket.io` is similar to how we configured the `session` middleware for the API. This is because they are meant to use the same authentication method - get the session id from a cookie and validate it.

When we previously configured the `session` middleware, we didn't explicitly set the cookie name for session (`key`). This is because the `session` package was using the default value. Now that we have added another package which needs access to the same value from the cookies, we need to explicitly set the `key` value in both configuration objects.

Both configurations will use the `express.sid` `key` value. We also should add a reference to the store.

```JavaScript
app.use(session({
  secret: process.env.SESSION_SECRET,
  key: 'express.sid',
  store: store,
  resave: true,
  saveUninitialized: true,
  cookie: { secure: false }
}));
```

The user object should be accessible on our socket object now as `socket.request.user`

```JavaScript
console.log('user ' + socket.request.user.username + ' connected');
```

```JavaScript
  let currentUsers = 0;
  io.on('connection', (socket) => {
    ++currentUsers;
    io.emit('user count', currentUsers);
    // console.log('A user has connected');
    console.log('user ' + socket.request.user.username + ' connected');

    socket.on('disconnect', () => {
      console.log('A user has disconnected');
      --currentUsers;
      io.emit('user count', currentUsers);
    });
  });
```

---

## Announce New Users

Chat rooms sometimes include an announcement of when a user connects or disconnects. We are already doing this through console logs, so we will just have to modify it. The most logical way of doing this is sending three pieces of data with the even: the username of the user, the current user count, and if that username connected or disconnected.

Let's change our `'user count'` event name to `'user'` and pass this created object along. `connected` will be true for when a user is connecting and false for when they are disconnecting.

```JavaScript
  let currentUsers = 0;
  io.on('connection', (socket) => {
    ++currentUsers;
    io.emit('user', {
      username: socket.request.user.username,
      currentUsers,
      connected: true,
    });
    // console.log('A user has connected');
    console.log('user ' + socket.request.user.username + ' connected');

    socket.on('disconnect', () => {
      console.log('A user has disconnected');
      --currentUsers;
      io.emit('user', {
        username: socket.request.user.username,
        currentUsers,
        connected: false,
      });
    });
```

With this the client will have all the necessary information to correctly display the current user count and announce when a user connects or disconnects.

```JavaScript
socket.on('user', function(data) {
  $('#num-users').text(data.currentUsers + ' users online');
  let message = data.username + (data.connected 
                                  ? ' has joined the chat.' 
                                  : ' has left the chat.');
  $('#messages').append($('<li>').html('<b>' + message + '</b>'));
});
```

---

## Send and Display Chat Messages

In order to display messages from users, we need to have the client emit the message they have typed:

```JavaScript
  // Form submittion with new message in field with id 'm'
  $('form').submit(function () {
    var messageToSend = $('#m').val();

    socket.emit('chat message', messageToSend);

    $('#m').val('');
    return false; // prevent form submit from refreshing page
  });
});
```

Now on the server we need to listen to the socket for the event `'chat message'` with the data being named `message`. Once we receive the event it should be `emitted` from the server to all `sockets`. This way all users will the the message.

```JavaScript
  let currentUsers = 0;
  io.on('connection', (socket) => {
    ++currentUsers;
    io.emit('user', {
      username: socket.request.user.username,
      currentUsers,
      connected: true,
    });

    console.log('user ' + socket.request.user.username + ' connected');

    // chat messages
    socket.on('chat message', (message) => {
      io.emit('chat message', {
        username: socket.request.user.username,
        message,
      });
    });

    socket.on('disconnect', () => {
      console.log('A user has disconnected');
      --currentUsers;
      io.emit('user', {
        username: socket.request.user.username,
        currentUsers,
        connected: false,
      });
    });
  });
```

Then back on the client side we need to listen for emitted chat messages from the server.

```JavaScript
  socket.on('chat message', function(data) {
    $('#messages').append($('<li>').text(`${data.username}: ${data.message}`));
  });
```

The message a user sends does not go directly to their chatbox, it first gets emitted to the server, then the server emits the message back then it is displayed.
